---
title: "Best Practices for SESYNC Virtual Meetings"
tags:
 - Remote Participants
author: khondula
---

Yet another set of recommendations for how to transition to remote work!? Yes! However, this post presents a curated list of strategies specifically to help leaders of synthesis teams who are faced with the prospect of holding one or more Pursuit meetings online rather than at our center in Annapolis, Maryland. Although our model thus far has emphasized the value of those in-person meetings (and we even designed the physical layout to maximize interaction), like you we're now adapting in order to help you build or maintain team collaborations, keep forward momentum on research, and to continue providing the technology and support for carrying out synthesis research in online computing environments.

## Planning and preparation

1. Revisit the **scope of your meeting goals** and adjust your expectations. Goals for each meeting or session may need to be reduced compared to what could be accomplished during all-day in-person meetings where team members have reduced other distractions and build collective energy from the group. Consider the number and types of people that can attend your meeting. Pursuit team size is based on what is known about effective collaborations, but a virtual format may provide the opportunity for limited participation from people that may not have otherwise been able to attend an in-person meeting. 

2. When **scheduling**, carefully consider timezones, fatigue, and adding more structure to your agenda than you would for an in-person meeting. Identify the range of time zones participants will be joining from. Note that there is only 1 hour of the day that allows most of the world (except New Zealand) to participate between midnight and 6:30am local time--2:30 GMT. If your team is spread out around the world, consider having breaks long enough to accomodate a meal. Scheduling 3-4 hours of meeting per day may also make it easier to accomodate time zone differences. Let SESYNC staff know when you are holding meetings and whether you would like us to ne "on call" to help out when things go pear-shaped.  

3. Consider one-on-one **pre-meetings** with participants especially if it is your teams first meeting. This could be facilitated with a questionaire to gain insight from each participant about what they hope to gain from the meeting, what they hope to contribute, and what they may be anxious about. 

4. Have a logistics plan, test the plan, and **have a backup plan**. Virtual meetings are less forgiving if technology is not working as planned. Test the platform you are using ahead of time if you have not used it before or are planning to use a feature you are not familiar with. Reach out to cyberhelp@sesync.org for help with technology. Make sure there is a way to communicate outside video conference. Provide content and links to content to download. Determine how you will capture content of meeting, e.g. know whether chat messages will be saved, if participants are comfortable having meeting recorded. 

5. Design your meeting to **ensure accessibility and inclusivity**. Will participants in different countries have access to all platforms being used? Is there a way to participate fully without high-bandwisdth internet connectivity or multiple monitors in a home office? Does your team have deaf or hard-of-hearing participants that would benefit from a service like real-time captioning or video relay services? Consider asking team members in advance whether they are comfortable and willing to use their video during any or all of the meeting. 

## During your meeting

1. **Orient your team** with a tour of the virtual environment, code of conduct, and what to expect. This may include clarifying whether sessions will be recorded, if there is consent for taking screenshots of the meeting e.g to share on social media. Be clear about how to participate e.g. whether the host or co-host is keeping an eye on the chat window or participants list for questions and hand-raise emojis. Don't assume that everyone is familiar with the features of any given software.  

2. Consider **designating a co-host** who is not the presenter to manage logistics during a session. It can be difficult for a present to manage participation or handle unanticipated distruptions while delivering content. SESYNC staff may be able to fulfill this role, or a co-lead that can use chat and private messages to moderate the flow of discussion and make adjustments in real time. You can share this responsibility among team members by rotating the co-host role between sessions. In Zoom meetings, both the host and co-hosts can open a window to manage participants to monitor for alters such as raised hands and control mute settings. Only a host can create breakout rooms, transfer hosting roles, manage polls, or end a meeting. 

3. Use a shared note-taking document and provide alternate ways to access or download material being presented, such as a link to a cloud-based file system like Google Drive or SESYNC's file share. 

4. **Promote focus** (or **Minimize distractions** ?) Realize that there is a danger for e-conferences or virtual meetings to be taken less seriously than in-person meetings because there is no travel involved and participants are generally not removed from their everyday environment. Turn off visual and audio notifications on your computer (e.g. Do Not Disturb setting on Macs or System > Turn off Notifications on PC). Dedicate as much screen real estate to your meeting as possible, and consider sharing only a relevant window rather than your entire screen when sharing content if you don't need to switch between windows. If possible, consider leveraging hardware to ensure that team members will be able to see your face well--seeing each other helps to create a more personal experience for sessions focused on conversation. Diffuse natural light is the best for illuminating your face, but when it is unavailable or unreliable rearranging several lamps to your desk set-up can be a good substitute. 

5. **Create opportunities for informal interaction.** Allow a space for participants to share information about themselve, their expertise, and contact methods to each other outside of a round of introductions during live video. This can be at the beginning of a shared note-taking document. Recognize that team members at different career stages may have different needs or desires for networking with colleagues. If it is your team's first Pursuit meeting, consider devising activities that promote a sense of togetherness--anything from polls during meeting breaks (cutest pet, best zoom background, silliest hat or hairstyle) to [organized Strava events](https://www.sfssummerofscience.com/fun-run). 


## Following up

1. Welcome asynchronous contributions and provide guidelines on how to do so. Even for team members that are virtually present, it may be more difficult to fully engage during plenary sessions due to time zone differences, hardware or connectivity issues, distractions, or other issues. Inviting contributions outside of the scheduled meeting time e.g. in a shared note-taking document, Slack workspace, or GitHub issues, provides mechanisms for everyone to more fully engage. 

2. Summarize what was achieved and outline the next steps. 


## Links to Resources

> From SESYNC: 

* [Resources and Tips for Elevating Your Team Science in an All-Virtual World](https://www.sesync.org/resources-and-tips-for-elevating-your-team-science-in-an-all-virtual-world): 

* [SESYNC's Graduate Program Plugs in but Keeps the Connection Human: Here's how your team can do the same](
https://www.sesync.org/news/tue-2020-06-09-1905/sesync%E2%80%99s-graduate-program-plugs-in-but-keeps-the-connection-human-here%E2%80%99s): an overview of strategies that SESYNC graduate pursuit teams are using to adapt to all-virtual collaborations

* [Who knew? Virtual meetings less scary than climate change](https://www.sesync.org/news/tue-2020-05-05-1741/who-knew-virtual-meetings-less-scary-than-climate-change): account from a SESYNC postdoc that helped organize and host the first meeting of the Global Nitrogen Decline Pursuit team

> From the community:

* [Virtual Conferences: A Guide to Best Practices](https://people.clarkson.edu/~jmatthew/acm/VirtualConferences_GuideToBestPractices_CURRENT.pdf): Living document from the Association for Computing Machinery's task force on what conferences can do to replace face-to-face meetings, including [appendices](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LLLniPkf48CCZyG_BNy1ylF2wXNlztqNEOnzNuMQmJc/edit#heading=h.r4e4nqt07m1p) with tables comparing features of specific tools and a [list](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XsGDOHzBhY9S-D4Smp2p9JgqdI0umZ0IZVi7Nhm0gYg/edit#heading=h.3qwf12ev3zo3) with ideas for creating a sense of presence. 

* [Online communities and communication tools](https://www.cscce.org/resources/online-communities-and-communication-tools/): blog posts and guidebooks from the Center for Scientific Collaboration and Community Engagement

* [Accessible Remote Attendance](https://accesssigchi.com/accessible-remote-attendance/): best practices compiled by volunteers working to make the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on Computer-Human Interaction more accessible

* [Going Virtual! What we learned from the EFI-RCN virtual workshop](https://ecoforecast.org/going-virtual-what-we-learned-from-the-efi-rcn-virtual-workshop/): blog post account of a virutal workshop with approximately 150 participants

* [How to run a remote workshop, Openscapes/Open Leaders Style](https://www.openscapes.org/blog/2020/03/11/how-to-run-a-remote-workshop/): tips for running remote meetings by Julie Lowndes

* [Zoom Conference Calls Tech Guide](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Rvp6NfRNNs6e4bx2l07XWlB4vvevMnn9m-cu97jRhzw/edit#heading=h.2gazcsgmxkub) manual from Showing Up for Racial Justice organization 

* [E-Conferencing Toolkit](https://aroundtheworld.ualberta.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/E-Conferencing-Toolkit.pdf) from the University of Alberta

* [Instructions for using breakout rooms in Zoom](https://support.zoom.us/hc/en-us/articles/360032752671-Pre-assigning-participants-to-breakout-rooms) and a [video introduction](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jbPpdyn16sY)
)


QUESTIONS:

- (Tyler) Co-hosting zoom meetings for people outside of organization?

- (Rebecca/Jon) Number of participants? people who might not otherwise have been able to participate may now be able to (not limited to size of meeting rooms, ability to travel, etc.). Provide any advice regarding this as an opportunity? 