# Summer Institute 2021: a year older and wiser

## Recap

- 2021 was the first summer institute that was intended to be virtual from the get-go
- 11 teams participated, about half were SESYNC-funded teams -- but there were a lot of SESYNC connections among the folks on the other teams
- Our coaching staff was data science team Rachael and Quentin, plus postdoc Renee and guest instructor/coach Mary
- We had to juggle time zones from Central Europe to Hawaii, an 11-hour difference. We're experts in that by now!
- Big shout-out to the grad student teams

## Highlights of team projects

- We had a really interesting mix of projects and backgrounds represented, as you can see from the twitter thread I made during the final presentations.
- Some examples include a team working on using global models to predict changes in the biodiversity-ecosystem service relationship
- Another team was looking at stories of sea ice loss: how is it portrayed in the media and is that correlated with the actual trends in sea ice cover?
- We even had a team really getting into the weeds of agent-based modeling to explore how small farmers in Nepal are reacting to climate change.
- Other topics included doing intensive spatial analysis on microclimates in Houston Texas to look at overlap between poverty, health, and climate, modeling fishing outside of protected areas off the coast of Oahu, and environmental justice in stream restoration projects.
- Lots of people were working on geospatial analysis and text mining. So those lessons came in handy!

## impressions/lessons learned

- We instructors had more experience with virtual teaching, and the students were clearly more used to remote learning
- Github is more important than ever if you have to do all of this stuff virtually. 
- If you can accomplish one thing, showing people how to collaborate remotely is it. I think that's what people took away from it the most. Mary echoes this sentiment.
- There was a decent amount of interaction between teams but we could have done more to foster it. Maybe take advantage of some of the overlaps among teams? For example we had three teams that were working with coral reefs.
- I hope that there will be one last hurrah for the SESYNC Summer Institute!